Straighten and Crop
After you insert your image into an image editing software the first thing you should do is to ensure your image is straight enough. Framing is an important aspect of making images look from good to great. To hit the right spot with image framing you should have to have the knowledge about photography and framing. I can give you what I know but let’s keep that for another day.
So the first thing is to straighten your image and this can be done by cropping your image. Use the cropping tool of your image editing software and use a grid view while you crop. Why grid view is important? Well, the whole photography or cinematography is standing upon one rule. That is the “Rule of Thirds”. To be able to put your image one the rule of thirds you have to use the grid view. So, use grid view and crop tool, then crop your image, straighten it, put it in the rule of thirds.

Remove Dust Particles
The next must-do thing in your image editing is fixing the image. The process that we use to remove dust, spots, blemishes, and wrinkles from a photo is the photo retouching service. In this image editing technique, we use the Healing Brush Tool, Patch Tool, Red Eye, Clone Tool, Eraser Tool, Blur Tool, Dodge, and Burn Tools to fix the imperfection of the image.

During the photoshoot, a photographer tries as hard as possible to get the perfect click but the raw image from the camera may contain dust particles, or maybe something came into the background. These are unavoidable and uncontrollable circumstances. So what should we do if we face something like this? The answer is image post-processing in photoshop.

If you get minor spots, scratches, or blemishes image retouching technique can save you. On the other hand, if you unwanted subject appearing in your frame then the background removal process will help you. In background removal service all you need to do is use the clipping path technique to select the object you want to remove and then hit the delete button.
Adjust the Highlights and Shadows
Highlights and shadows are an important aspect of an image and if you messed up here, your image will look awful. Generally, the photographer tries hard to keep the highlights and shadows close to perfect during the shoot. So, try to achieve the maximum balance of highlights and shadow in the raw image and then make it perfect in post-processing.