Learn from the Experts: 3 Simple Tricks To Design A Standout Brand
Published in Branding, Graphic design
A good brand equals great business. Businesses that present a brand consistently across their business can increase their revenue by up to 23 percent,  according to statistics cited by Forbes. With nearly every business expert continually driving home the importance of branding for business success, it’s no surprise that companies are now plugging millions into building a great brand. But with so many companies competing in the same market both on and offline, designing a standout image and brand is essential for businesses looking to  make promotion and advertising easier. Whether your aim is to increase your business value or drive consumer recognition, brand building can tick all the right boxes if done the right way and with a core focus on visuals.

Make Your Social Media Presence Visually Appealing
Social media is now ingrained into the consumer buying process. On Instagram, 90 percent of users follow businesses that they like and the engagement rate between them is currently 1.90 percent, indicating just how often the platform is used for viewing and interacting. When it comes to video marketing — a  key content marketing trend for 2020 — social media continues to lead the way, accounting for 28.7 percent of total video ad spending.
With studies like PWC’s Retail 2017 survey showing that 59 percent of consumers use social media for everyday inspiration, having a well-curated social media account is now a necessity for any business looking to get on the map and stay there. Visual content is more likely to be shared on social media, which means it goes a long way in building your brand and getting your name out there. In addition to high-quality visual images, your graphics should be original and your content delivered in easily summed-up formats, such as infographics. A great idea is to  choose a social media color palette and posting styles, such as grayscale images for a still, serene, and more personal tone.

Make Your Brand’s Print Visuals A Priority