Procreate vs. Photoshop: Should You Make the Switch?
Designers are in love with Procreate. The app built for creative professionals makes designing on an iPad easier and more efficient in a completely new way. But can a $9.99 app be a realistic Photoshop competitor?

For some, the answer is a definite yes.

Here are five reasons Procreate could become your go-to design app (and five reasons why it might not). Plus, an introduction to what Procreate is, and why it might be the perfect app for you.

What is Procreate?
If you aren’t familiar with Procreate, it’s an iPad app that’s made for professional creatives. You can sketch, paint and edit with a robust collection of tools. It responds to touch and pressure with the Apple Pencil for detailed work.

The tool includes a sleek interface and is a game changer when it comes to online drawing apps. It includes 64-bit color, customizable brushes, incredible canvas resolutions, a nice layer system, and cinema-style effects.

Plus, everything includes the ease of use you’d expect from an Apple product (and you can save images from device to device). While this tool is fun for a lot of creatives, it’s most practical applications are for sketching, illustrations, some light editing and for drawing typography. But can Procreate replace other software and tools? (Maybe.)
1. Quick Image Tweaking
ant to touch up an image or stylize a piece of artwork? Procreate has got you covered. The image tweaking – we won’t call this an editing suite – includes blurs, sharpening, curve manipulation, color balance and more. Think of these tools as giving you the ability to design a cool filter of your own (Instagram style) and apply it to images.

Then you can make it super fun with a time-lapse view of the changes that you can share. This small feature is great for designers that are experimenting with new techniques and want to get or give feedback.

For editing on a tablet, this is probably one of the best, and most professional options available.
While tweaking images is fun, Procreate is really designed for illustrators. The brush library has more than 130 brushes that create almost any art technique you can images. There’s also a dual-texture system so you can mix and match brush types.

Every brush is customizable as well. (You’d be hard-pressed to have this many tools in an actual studio.) And we have a collection of 30+ of the best Procreate brushes to get you started!

What sets Procreate apart in terms of illustration is that this is a professional set of tools. You can create a huge canvas to work on and export the drawings in high resolution still or video frames.

It’s hard to imagine how cool the illustration tools are until you start playing with them. Add the Apple Pencil to the mix and it’s just like the real thing… albeit with the ability to tap “undo”! The drawing experience is as close to real as you can get in the